# Bio-informatics Databases

## **Uniprot**

### Compositions and sources

#### Compositions

- UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (manually annotated and reviewed)
- UniProtKB/TrEMBL (automatically annotated and not reviewed)

#### Sources

- Uniprot: all encapsulate
- UniRef: Non-redundant
- UniParc: Records previous status

### Accession

#### Representation

 `reg exp: [OPQ][0-9][A-Z0-9]{3}[0-9]|[A-NR-Z][0-9]([A-Z][A-Z0-9]{2}[0-9]){1,2}`

 `Q10289: Q-1-028-9`

 `A2BC19：A-2-(B-C1-9)`

 `A0A023GPI8: A-0-(A-02-3)-(G-PI-8)`

#### Accession Merge and Demerge

## **BLAST alignment**

For both protein sequence alignment and nucleotide sequence alignment.

### BLAST Setup

#### **Max target sequences**

#### **Max matches in a query range**

#### **Database:**

- Clustered db like **UniRef90** and **UniRef50** are more prefered, where UniRef90 clusters sequences have 90% sequence identity. UniRef50 clusters sequences have 50% sequence identity.
- RefSeq and Swiss-Prot

#### **Scoring matrix:**

Read about substitution matrices on [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Substitution_matrix) and [NCBI BLAST](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/html/sub_matrix.html).

### Result Interpretation: GenBank and Graphview

View external information for each hit from the link to **GenBank** or **Graphview** (legend: [NCBI Graphview legend interpretation](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/tools/sviewer/legends/#anchor_8))

### Result Interpretation: Layout

|Organism|Blast Name|Score|Number of Hits|
|---|---|---|---|
|Relevant close to far, the most distantly-related taxon locates at the last second row| |Descending|Descending|

### Result Interpretation: Parameters

#### **Query Coverage**: The length of the match

$$
Coverage = \frac {Alignment\quad length} {Query\quad sequence\quad length} × 100\%
$$

#### **Bit Score:** A matrix generated by alignment algorithm

To reduce the computation cost, calculate the upper triangular matrix instead of the whole matrix.

#### **E-value:** The significance of the match

##### Formula to calculate

$$
E=K \times m \times n \times e^ {-lambda\times S}
$$

Where *S* denotes the homolog scores between two sequences, *m* denotes the length of the target sequence, *n* denotes the size of database, and *K* and *n* are parameters depending on algorithm and database.

##### Values

- E-value < 0.01: commonly considered significant, but there are features of biological sequences which can confound this so care is advised

- E-value < 1e-5: usually homologues

- E-value > 0.01: doesn't necessarily mean a hit is false

- E-values are normalized basing on each database, only E-values from the same db are comparable.

- Bit scores between BLAST searches with different query sequences are not comparable.

#### **Length of hit**

> It is possible to get good (i.e. small) e-values even if only a small regions of your query sequence is matched by a hit. In such instances you might consider very short matches as False Positives, even when the e-values are below the values you're looking for.

### Other BLAST algorithm

|Search Programme|Query|Hit|
|---|---|---|
|BLASTX|Input nucleotide, translate/ map to protein|Protein db|
|TBLASTN|Input protein|Nucleotide db, map to protein|
|TBLASTX|Input nucleotide, map to protein|Nucleotide db, map to protein|

### Result inspection

Check the organism of query and hit.

Hit has high bit score but presents in a irrelevant organism might be a FP.

## **MSA**
